---
title: Constructions and Generalizations of *Spot-It*
date: "April 28, 2024"
emoji: 👀
summary:
    I try to work out the combinatorial design and algaebric geometry
    inherent to the design of *Spot-It* and $(v, k, \lambda)$ difference sets. Read more
    to see some generalizations of the game, algorithm designs for 
    generating such games and design your own *Emojified Spot-It*.
---

## Background

- I learned about *Spot-It* from a friend. Fun to play alone.
- Card matching game, where we can find exactly one match per card.
- My first instinct after reading the packet that stated 55 cards and 57 symbols was, there's no way that's optimal. Hence the fun 🐰 rabbit-hole and this post.
- Lots of variations of the game, will focus on single player *Spot-It*.
- This is my attempt to rev. eng. the math behind spot-it without looking at previous work for the sake of fun!
- Note: Combinatorial designs and algaebric geometry are both outside of my typical wheelhouse, I tried to present this as best as I can with my intuition, but there are many posts by mathematicians that you should check out! I will leave a couple at the end.

## Math-ification

- Let's try to define the problem such that we can find good reductions.
- A game where there are $c$ cards, $s$ symbols and exactly 1 matching symbol per pair of cards.



## Difference Sets

- This is what's known as a $(v, k, \lambda)$ combinatorial design or difference set. Where $\lambda=1$ is the number of . $v$ is the number of cards. $k$ is the number of cards containing each symbol.
  - A (v, k, A)-configuration is an arrangement of v elements $x_1, x_2, \cdots$ 
into v sets $S_1, S_2, \cdots$ such that every set contains exactly $\lambda$ elements in common.
  - Singer type difference set https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/document?repid=rep1&type=pdf&doi=522ead886d7ce8af1c34a58881548d7e5e58c639


Use `spot_it_combinatorial_design.py` for `galois` example of construction on GF.



## Projective Planes








Perfect difference set: $D\subset \mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ if every nonzero $a \ in \mathbb{Z}/m\mathbb{Z}$ can be written unique as $a = d_i - d_j$ for $d_i, d_j \in D$.

These are large Siden set. <- important for number theory
  if $a+b = c+d$ for $a, b, c, d \in D$ then ${a, b} = {c, d}$.

For D to possible exist need m=n^2+n+1 and #D=n+1. n is the order of $D$.

Any PDS gives rise to a finite projective plane. $D -> $
- Take set of points by taking p = Z / (n^2+n+1)Z. 
- and the lines to be the set of translates.

When do they exist?
Singer -> pds of all prime power orders exist

Take $q$ prime power -> $\zeta$ generator of $\mathbb{F}_{q^3}$. $D=\\{k: \zeta^k =1+a\zeta\\}\mod q^2+q+1$ for $a\in \mathbb{F}_q \cup \\{0\\}$ is a PDS.

## Cool things

- P.P. are each others duals. The symmetry of cards and symbol exists. 
  - Namely: for every pair of symbols there is a unique card and for every 2 card, one symbol.
  - This can be noticed from the P.P. <-> Cyclic Difference Set symmetry
- We conjecture that these designs exist for prime powers only, but we don't have proof. For example, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2003.04929 shows an asymptotic proof of the prime power conjecture for PDS, but even for order 12, we don't know if there is a PDS/P.P.

## Other Generalizations

- If every card has the same number of symbols and every symbol appears on the same number of cards, this would be considered a "Steiner system with parameters v,k,3" or a "3-(v,k,1)-design"

